Greeks said, goodbye, no mind.
That's the closest they get to bye-bye, stupid.
They had made this out of epoxy and green ink and blue ink and made a mold.
And Fred Van Dornick, being the classical scholar, had written the Greek.
And it really had me fooled.
However, I then had to pass a law.
which has been held since then, any person ever found salting the wreck would be dismissed immediately because of the danger of something not being found and having it turn up in 500 or 1,000 years.
And that has actually probably happened because Pete DeJong, P-I-E-T-D-E-J-O-N-G, was the little Cockney artist who drew for all the archaeologists, classical archaeologists in the Mediterranean, in Greece,
for decades.
I knew him when he was in his 70s or 80s.
And he told me once that passing the time once with a bunch of discarded pottery, potsherders from some dig, he was carving names like Themistocles and so forth.
And then they somehow got misplaced.
And next thing he knew, they'd just been sent into the museum.
He said he was too embarrassed to tell anybody.
Well, of course, the word ostracon means a piece of broken pottery.
And we get our word ostracized because people would carve onto a piece of broken pottery the name of the person to be exiled.
And so he said, I have no idea if anything like that's ever been actually found or published.
You know, there's the potential for somebody to get their history all wrong.
I once realized I'd picked up some Greek pot sherds walking through a field in Greece, and I was in central Anatolia on another dig, and I reached into the jacket pocket and realized I hadn't ever discarded them.
And I carefully took them all the way back to Greece, because what if I dropped them there in the center of Turkey?
Some student would have written a dissertation about these Iron Age Greeks that set up camp there at Gordian, you see.
And so you have to be careful with archaeological finds.
For you personally, have you ever had any, in hindsight, any dangerous
What we fear most clearly is simply drowning and very fortunately we've not, I'm superstitious about all this.
I never like to brag about our safe diving record because when we've had our few accidents it's always been when
When I've honestly thought or just said to somebody, boy, it's going so well.
You look at this beautiful day.
And then Eric Ryan gets an embolism where somebody probably cuts a finger off or something like that.
We worry about drowning.
That has not yet happened, thank goodness.
We worry about the bends.
We have a doctor with us.
We have a chamber.
And so we treat the bends.
But we have very, very few cases.
But those are the major things.
I think we almost worry as much about somebody simply falling from a moving boat and hitting their head on something, a slippery deck, as anything else.
So we do always have a physician with us, or we try to.
Is it normal for people to get an upset stomach, to have a cold?
We've had a lot of that, but very little in the last few years, and people are crediting it to our eating better, having Angie Mitchell as our cook, and Jane somebody, another English cook.
People eat very, very well.
They're not losing weight, and we don't know if that's doing it, but we have very, very
incredibly lesser number of infected ears, infected sinuses, upset stomachs.
Are there some foods that you all concentrate on and some others that you... She, knowing us, she's, I don't think she's a dietician, but she uses common sense, packs us with lots and lots of carbohydrates.
We have, you know, we always have lots of spaghetti and, not lots like we're eating spaghetti all the time, but potato salad, you know, a lot of heavy things.
She loves to make cakes.
And as I say, we used to lose weight every summer and now we don't, which is too bad for some of us that want to, but for the thinner people it's not a bad thing.
When a project is underway, about how many people are normally there at one time?
On a major excavation, we'll have about 30, 30 or 35.
And they'll be there for three months?
If possible.
Last time we had three months with about 30 people, maybe slightly more.
Does everybody go at about the same time and come home at about the same time?
Not quite.
The Turkish students usually come later and can stay later, which is kind of nice.
Like our American students have to leave, say, by the 20th of August to get back to term here.
But the Turkish students can stay later, so we work on until about the 15th of September, which is nice because our permit staff can stay that late.
Describe how the American students and the Turkish students mesh.
I think we're unaware that we're different nationalities.
One of the things that's happened is that I've been on our little ship, Virazon, sitting, you know, having a drink in the evening, or coffee in the afternoon, or eating a meal, and suddenly realized that Claude Dutwy, I said I was going to mention his name later, is sitting opposite me, and he's French, and Tufan will be next to me, and he's Turkish, and
Robin Peercy will be next to me and he's English and, you know, we can have five nationalities sitting there and we're totally oblivious to this.
How do you stay during those three months?
How do you stay in communication with the rest of the world as to what's happening?
In the old days I had a little portable radio and I'd listen to either the Voice of America news or the BBC every night.
We don't tend to do that so much anymore because people were coming out and bringing newspapers.
I had the same radio this summer and never turned it on to the Voice of America once.
Do you remember during any of those experiences hearing some event of worldwide importance that stunned you?
Oh, yes.
Yes.
Such as?
Tiananmen Square I listened to every night on this little portable radio, and it got more and more tense, and then everybody thought it was okay.
So I thought, oh, the first night I hadn't listened to the news that summer probably.
I thought I don't have to listen tonight, and that was the night of the massacre, I guess is the word that we use.
Because I got that the next night.
So that was something world-shanking.
Oz Alprazan, the director of the Beaudry Museum, got word passed down to him on a clipboard that his second son was born.
And he loves to tell that story.
Then the other one, of course, was listening to every single second of the Cyprus war, because we were in Turkey on this little desert island, Rock Island, where our camp was, and we were listening to the war going on in Cyprus, wondering how to get back, what had happened to our homes, and what would be our future.
So we'd listen to that.
Now, things have changed so much.
My children, they're my two sons who are now grown and married,
And Ann, my wife, all say without hesitation, the most pleasant year of our lives was 1979-80 when I got sort of like a sabbatical from here and went to Turkey.
And we lived in the bottom floor of a three-story house.
We had no television, no telephone, no car.
No computers in those days.
No Daily English newspaper?
No.
Well, actually, the Daily News, we'd get it late.
Oh, okay.
We could get that.
The entire heap of the house was a little wood stove in the living room, and the wood was delivered by a camel.
We'd go collecting driftwood, though, or picking up pine cones in the forest for it.
And what did we do at night?
We'd sit around when it was bitter cold outside.
It goes down just like it does in College Station to almost freezing.
We'd sit around this little wood stove when the kids were 9 and 12 years old and they would read.
Or we'd listen to maybe a tape on my little cheap portable radio.
And I had a typewriter, manual typewriter, and we were very happy.
Now, sometimes I think, why do I bother to go to Bodrum?
Because I have my own house there.
We have built a house.
And I have a television.
I've got a satellite so I can watch the BBC news and English every day.
I followed the entire election just now.
The BBC, that was the lead story between Gore and Bush.
So I got to follow that.
In fact, they'd break in for live events.
I've got a computer in my house where I can check CNN news or the Washington Post every morning if I feel like it.
We have a telephone with an answering machine, our own car, central heating.
And yet nobody says it's the most pleasant year of their life anymore.
And I'm assuming that during all of these years English was the proof.
Yes.
My Turkish is embarrassing, frankly.
A Turkish archaeologist I know, a very pleasant woman, chided me and said to me, you ought to be ashamed of yourself.
Your Turkish was much better 25 or 30 years ago than it is today.
Because when I first went there, I had to do the customs.
I had to get the permits.
I had to deal with the local police and so forth in Bogdan, none of whom spoke English.
Now I've got a staff that speaks English as well as I do.
People who meet Jamal Pulak say, here in Texas, I'll say, I want you to meet Jamal Pulak.
And they misunderstand his name.
They say, well, howdy, Jim, Al.
And they speak with that accent.
So now I have other people go get the permits and get the, you know, do the shopping and keep the books and deal with the workers and all that.
So my Turkish has got so bad that this past spring, Ann and I,
took two months of intensive Turkish in Izmir, four hours a day, plus five or six hours of homework every day.
And I wrote essays and learned another thousand words and learned perfect grammar.
And then immediately got back to Bodrum and got lazy because we were all speaking English.
And I went back to my Tarzan Turkish.
And it's unfortunate.
When I lived in Greece, after two years, I was almost fluent.
But I never did that in Turkish because
Well, there was one reason, and that is in the early days we never thought we were going to be there after 40 years.
We thought, well, we'll be here another year, we'll be here another year, and then one year after another, after another, after another, and then suddenly 40 years has gone by.
Compare the bureaucratic routine of going from the United States to Turkey
Thirty years ago and now.
Is it easier?
It's harder now.
Harder?
It's more bureaucratic, yeah.
In those days we could just pick up a guy coming along the coast with a diving equipment and say, hey, you want to join us as one of our divers.
Now we have to send in six months in advance at least, not only an application to renew our permit,
but a list of everyone who's coming in, you know, mother's name, father's name, birthplace, birthdate, all this information.
And then they have to check out all these people through their Ministry of the Interior and secret police and military.
And so it takes, it's much harder to do now.
And sometimes, I mean, sometimes, like last year, a new permit,
has to be signed by every single minister in Turkey.
Well it was an election year, they all had electioneering, so I went to Turkey
ready to start on June 1st, and we did not get our permit.
And here I was with 15 or 20 Texas A&M students.
We did not get our permit until August 7th.
Oh my goodness.
Now, what saved us, what saved us is the Ministry of Culture and the Department of the Director of Antiquities were sympathetic, and so they said that we could prepare the site for excavation.
And we had a commissioner diving with us, and that meant that we started measuring it and mapping it, and then removing a little of the sand and cleaning it.
And so, in a way, we were excavating it, but we weren't raising any objects.
So we didn't waste the whole summer, but I still must have suffered a many nervous breakdown before it was over.
It was the worst summer of my life.
Whereas this year, we got our permit.
On June 15th, we started work, and everybody said, I have so many messages saying it was the nicest summer that I'd ever spent in the field.
It's just all the difference in the world.
And you, as a veteran, to get from College Station to Bodrum takes how long?
I can get back, I can wake up in my bed in Bodrum, Turkey, and sleep in my bed here that night.
Really?
And it used to be when I traveled from here to New York by train, then took a ship and all that, it was like two weeks.
Yes.
Now, it used to be like a seven or eight, the first year ten, and then later seven hour drive from Izmir,
And so we could fly to Izmir, or we could fly to Athens, take an overnight ferry boat to the Greek island of Kos, and that's only one hour by fishing boat, and now big ferry boats and hydrofoils to Bodrum.
So there are a number of ways of getting there, but today it's, I fly to Istanbul, transfer to a flight directly from Istanbul to New York, and then fly from New York to Houston, and Ann will meet me in Houston, and I'll be in bed the same day.
In all of your years over there, have you ever needed any medical attention off-site?
That is, you had to go to the hospital or to the clinic?
Oh, yes.
I was Bob Ballard, the fellow who found the Titanic, and Jack Kelly, who was one of the founding directors of I&E, whose name has come up.
And we got on a plane to fly between Istanbul and Sampson, where Bob Ballard's been doing this deep work.
He's been making a lot of news, finding well-preserved wrecks in the Black Sea.
And before the plane took off, he was taxiing it.
Suddenly, my foot went to sleep, and then my leg went to sleep, and then my side went to sleep, and my arm went to sleep, and my cheek went to sleep.
And I kept moving around like that, and I realized that I was having a stroke.
So I pushed for the bell for the flight attendant.
She came back looking very annoyed, like, don't you realize we're taxiing?
And I said, which means in Turkish, on this side it's like I'm asleep.
The man next to me was a Turkish doctor and he told her to get down his bag and he gave me an aspirin, which is the best thing you can do.
The pilot stopped the plane.
It was a regular commercial Turkish Airlines, you know, Boeing 737, I guess.
And he came back.
and said, would I like to get off?
And I thought, well, what in the world am I going to do if I get off with my suitcase in the middle of the runway and start yelling, help, I'm having a stroke?
And I said, no, I'll go on.
In Ballard's group was the just-retired dean of the medical school from Yale, one of the trustees of his Institute for Exploration.
So he came back and sat with me.
And I said, I'll go on.
I didn't know whether the pressure
would drive that a lot farther in my brain, and I might die.
I mean, I thought maybe I'll die before we get there.
I said, I'll go on.
At least I'm with people I know.
So we were met by a minibus, and I went to the state hospital there, connected to a university in Sampson.
And they laid me down, and Lord my blood bless you, I guess, or whatever you do.
And it was wonderful.
I had an English-speaking urologist who attends meetings in Europe all the time.
I had a CAT scan.
I had sonograms of my heart, my carotid arteries.
I had EKG.
And you can't really do much for a stroke, you know.
But I had round-the-clock care.
And the residents would all come in, you know, do all their things, pricking me with needles to see where I'd get any feeling.
And I had a private room, which I think they gave me because I was a foreigner, with a television set in the remote.
So on the 4th of July, I remember lying there watching Wimbledon in color.
And it was wonderful.
Now, I have to say,
In the early 1960s, if I had appendicitis in a camp, I'd be dead.
And I had a ruptured appendix here at College Station.
I was reading papers one night and got a pain, went to the hospital, it ruptured, and I'd have been dead.
And I might have even been dead in Bodrum, because the medical facilities there were just filthy and you know, it was awful.
However, now there is a modern hospital in Bodrum.
Things have changed so much that an 18-year-old son of one of our sponsors was there, one of our patrons.
He complained of stomach pains.
He was taken to the hospital.
And before he was operated on for appendicitis, his English-speaking doctor was speaking to the boy's physician in California by telephone to describe it.
He was up in a few days and did just fine.
That would not have happened in the past.
Let's see, proudest moments.
Your proudest moments during all these years.
This summer?
Highlights.
This summer.
Two things happened.
On the 23rd of July, I didn't know they were going to ask me to do this.
But there were probably 500 people there, including 50 people from the states and abroad, to attend the ribbon cutting of the new building devoted to the Bronze Age shipwrecks we've excavated in the Bodrum Castle, which is a 15th century castle.
We called it a Crusader Castle, even though the Crusades were over.
It was a place for Christians to go on the way to Rhodes and so forth.
And at the last minute, they grabbed my arm and shoved me up, and there was probably fifteen television cameras and reporters and flash bulbs.
And they wanted me to hold the hand of the Minister of Culture to cut the ribbon to open it.
And it is one of the most incredible museum exhibits you can see in the world today.
And Oz Alpazan, the director of the museum, who came to learn to dive with us,
when he was an undergraduate archaeology student at Istanbul University in 1962.
So we've been together for almost four decades.
He had the main room, you're working on a balcony, overlooking up on the opposite wall a full-scale replica cut away in half of the Bronze Age shipwreck excavated with all the cargo put back in place and people on the deck and so forth.
And then you look down and you see what the wrecked look on the seabed, a diorama,
All of this is replicated.
I mean, none of the original stuff is there.
With blue and green light playing on it.
And you stand there, and I've been getting chills even thinking about it.
People just are in awe of looking at this 3,300-year-old ship come alive, and then looking down and seeing what it looked like on the seabed.
And then they go into the next room, where actually he was able to get a volunteer.
The woman in charge of exhibiting for the Metropolitan Museum of Art came over to make the display cases, put things in it.
And then you see the actual objects, the actual gold jewelry, the actual things.
And we had that.
And the very next day, and there was a meal that night for hundreds of people, and then the very next day we had cutting ribbons, our library building, our conservation laboratory, our computer center.
And my house is right, I walked through a garden gate into my garden and my house is right next door.
I hope the institute somehow will acquire my house after I die.
I can't give it away, it belongs to my kids, but if they want to sell it, they'll sell it to the institute and make it a wonderful director's house since it's right there.
Incidentally, our boundary in front of our, it's the ancient city wall of Halicarnassus.
That's where Herodotus was born, one of the seven wonders of the ancient world, the mausoleum of Halicarnassus, just down the street.
Probably some of the stones for it are built into my house.
As a brick collector, see, that gets my attention.
Ah, yeah.
Let's see, humorous moments, funny.
We laugh our heads off.
It's hard to think what makes you laugh.
It's easy to remember bad things.
We usually remember that bad things have a way of disappearing.
That's why I do think, although it's hard at the moment, I do think the country will get over the bush-gore bitterness.
Because, you know, when I think back, oh, wasn't it wonderful?
And then somebody says, but don't you remember that was the year where you had the crazy commission and they wanted to stop your excavation?
Oh, yeah, yeah, I forgot about that.
Or that's the year that Vladi almost cut his hand off.
Oh, yeah, yeah.
Not hand, but cut through a couple of fingers on a compressor.
Humorous moments.
Oh.
I didn't see it.
I wish it had been filmed.
Everyone there said it was the funniest thing they ever saw in their lives.
One party night, as I say, we don't allow drinking through the week, but we'll have a party on a Thursday night because there's no dieting.
And I won't say that we were drunk or anything like that, but everybody was having fun drinking wine or beer or whatever.
And we had some sort of jazzy version of Beethoven's Fifth Symphony.
And for reasons unknown, Robin Piercy, this very tall 6'6", ungainly English gentleman, and I,
did a ballet.
People said it was the funniest thing they'd ever seen.
I mean, leaping into one another's arms and jetting, trying to do pirouettes and spinning.
Is this recorded on film?
It's not.
Everyone that's seen it said it was the funniest thing they ever saw.
I remember doing it, but I didn't think it was that funny.
It was just, and we could never, you could never repeat something like that.
It was just this inspiring moment.
I'd have to think about that.
I mean, there are people constantly doing little pranks, like now that they're computers, somebody got some sort of pin-up thing with all these scantily clad women and put the faces of a lot of the staff on it and printed it out in color and put it up on the bulletin board, which everybody laughed at, but... What about... Oh, I know.
It's Sertilimana.
where we had to bring all the fresh water out and just two 55 gallon oil drums twice a week for 30 people.
In medical sciences you can't live on that little water, but we did.
There was a brackish well at the other end of this natural harbor.
And so the women of the camp, the wives, used to go over there.
I'm trying not to be sexist because half of our divers are women, but they would go over and do laundry there.
And sometimes some of us would go with them.
And we found out that the greatest thing, we had these striped sheets, bed sheets, and
So we'd get in the rowboat, and we'd hold these up, and we would sail back, and we would dry one, and we'd put it down, grab another, pick it up, wet sheets, and we would dry the laundry by using them as sails.
And we actually, we would have races in these little rowboats with these, and we looked like Vikings with the striped sheets.
That was, that was a lot of fun.
That was a lot of fun.
Are there any examples of Aggie spirit in Turkey?
I mean, certainly we're all aware that we're from Texas A&M, and for example, I noticed that the National Geographic Explorer film, that in almost every scene I'm wearing my Texas A&M Nautical Archaeology sweatshirt, so very much so.
Spirit, I think that we're all very conscious that we come from the best program in the world for what we do, and that is the Texas A&M program, so yeah.
In hindsight, has the INA missed any opportunities?
Are some things that might have happened that you now realize
No, not, not, not on our own.
Now, the reason that we had two Chinese students here for a year, no, for a term, and they were really nice, nice young men, um, was because the Chinese government sent them here to develop a joint program, uh, in nautical archaeology.
I think they had a 13th century Chinese junk they wanted to excavate.
And one is from the National Museum and one is, uh, was from their Department of Archaeology.
Um, and
One of them wanted to stay here and work on a master's degree.
And I said, no, go home and then apply and come back.
No, I'd like to stay and get a master's degree with you.
And the week that they went home, one of them is from the Museum of Chinese History on Tiananmen Square was Tiananmen Square.
And they wrote to me and they said, we can't work now with Americans.
We have to work with the Japanese instead and we're really sorry.
And I see one of them from time to time in international meetings and you see still dreams of working with us.
And we're occasionally in touch by email.
They used to come to my house.
I used to do every other Friday night, I'd have my, back of my house is like an apartment, and it's my opera room, and I have about 70 operas on a laser disc, and they have a wonderful stereo system, big TV.
And I used to invite students if they wanted to come, if they didn't bother me, to come and watch an opera.
And here, these two Chinese students would come and watch Don Giovanni or Tosca or something.
So one night, I really surprised them because I had ordered a classical Chinese opera, which to Westerners didn't mean anything, but they were laughing their heads off because it was a comic opera.
And so they were nice kids.
And so I'm sorry that that never came about.
That wasn't our fault.
It was due to the international relations which keep us right now from working in Syria.
We have excellent friends and colleagues.
Oh, we have a branch in Egypt now.
That's one of our, two of our former students got married, set up.
Any research opportunities that were missed that you, in hindsight, wish that INA could have worked on, might have worked on?
No.
No, and that's because I think that I've probably been too – when I was president, sometimes I'd get as almost in debt because I was too willing to say yes.
I used to say if somebody said, you know, we have this wreck up in the Bering Sea, would you do it?
I'd say yes, and then we're later back where to find the money.
So I think we take advantage of every opportunity.
All right.
Now, I've just about run out of topics.
What have we not touched on that we should have?
I think we've really touched on everything.
All right.
Then the two or three things I can think of, let's make believe that you are now the consultant brought in to give advice to, at different levels.
First, the advice to the leaders of the INA as to what it should aspire to do in the future.
What advice would you give?
I would say that the leaders should,
keep INA in the forefront of archaeology by – our mission should be to look for and then choose from those we've found the most exciting archaeological sites underwater that – around the world.
And to publish them as well.
And we have a very good publication record.
I mean, archaeology without publication is looting, of course.
And so we're very pleased.
But people don't realize that for every month we dive,
We've now figured out a rule of thumb which holds true whether it's in the Caribbean or whether it's in Kenya or whether it's in the Mediterranean.
For every month we dive we spend two years on research, library research and conservation, uh, and publication.
The, uh, are there any things new that INA ought to start doing, or any new areas?
Well, there was a push by Jack Kelly, this founder, to get us involved in deep water archaeology with Bob Ballard, who, because there is a theory that wrecks deep in the Black Sea may be perfectly preserved because the Black Sea beneath a certain depth is anaerobic or without oxygen.
And Bob Ballard seems to be showing that is the case.
In fact, it's shallower than was dreamed.
Ballard and I are old friends.
We roomed together the summer I formed INA and the summer he was getting his PhD.
And he used to talk to me until 2 in the morning with the light out sometime in the room in this week-long government conference, US government conference on developing a program for man in the sea, about his dreams of using the Alvin and all that.
And then he went on and became famous on the Titanic.
and finding these living things in vents.
I was talking to him about my dream of forming this institute, and it's become world famous now.
Not the same thing Ballard has, but it's known in archaeological circles.
Ballard wants to run his own show, and Jack felt that we could somehow go in as equals, and I didn't think so, and Jack just got off the board because he's so angry at me because he thought that.
We do have Ina archaeologists working with him, but Ballard raises the millions of dollars he needs for this deep work, and it's terribly expensive, and I don't know how to find the money to do it, frankly.
He's got such a name that he can raise three million dollars to buy a piece of equipment.
I'd love to find three million dollars to endow the institute.
Should INA do more work in freshwater areas?
We're doing a lot.
We still work in the Great Lakes and in rivers.
Can you think of any kind of technology or anything else like that that may really be just on the horizon?
The one thing that the world has the greatest problem at is finding wrecks.
we can excavate a wreck now in diving depths and given enough money we excavate wrecks you know two miles deep uh because uh tommy thompson who is a treasure hunter you might say but but but an educated one he's an engineer uh has excavated the um the uh central america which was a very very rich ship carrying a payroll that sank in a storm miles off the coast of north carolina in the
like a mildee.
He spent millions to find it, but he's made millions because it was filled with bullion.
It's from the Civil War period.
But he's tried to do it carefully, and it shows that you can take objects one at a time and map them at depth, given enough money.
But he's paying for it by, you know, the quarter billion dollars that he says is on the ship, and I think is a lot of gold bullion coming off.
whereas we have to raise it for purely philanthropic gifts of, uh, for knowledge.
And so, um, so to find Rick is the most important thing.
And so I should tell you in that regard that, in fact, Jerome Hall, one of our former doctoral students, who is now president of the organization, is working with the woman who trained SEALs for the U.S.
Navy to find things.
And we think if you can train a seal to find a torpedo, maybe you can train a seal to recognize pottery and come back and tell you.
So that's a reality we're working on.
All right.
Again, as a consultant, now you're advising the department, the college, the university about the INA and related areas.
What advice would you give to the institutional leaders?
Keep the mix as close as possible to what it is today.
I think it's virtually perfect.